It's been suggested that during this period while
you were at the Hydrographic Office that research
and development oceanography was directed by or
divided up, if I may use that word, between Ewing,
Islin, and Revell, that they sort of are working on
plotting, as it were, expanding oceanography.
Would you agree with that?
You're talking... I'm talking about 46, 47, and
48, when Scripps and Woods Hole and O&R began to
think about what the future of oceanography is.
Yes, I think that's probably a pretty fair
statement. They certainly exerted a lot of
influence in the Washington area.
And
I think it's hard in a way for
me to recall too much what was happening at the
institutions at that time, because I wasn't
there. I wasn't in any of them. I was in Washington.
I think it was really to kind of stabilize after the
war and get things on what was looked at as more or
less stable footing. There was, if I can go off on a
tangent here for a moment, I showed you this
morning this book by Vaughan, which is I have
called NASCO one. NASCO is a term that came in
later, but this was one of the early attempts
of the National Academy of Sciences to look at the
state of marine sciences in this country, which
occurred in the 1920s, although that book of lawns
was not published until essentially 10 years
later. But there was another National Academy
committee set up at about the time you're talking
about, and I can't remember it exactly, at which
Scripps, Woods Hole, and so on were asked
essentially what they thought they wanted to do.
And I can't recall any of the content, but there is a
small publication resulting from that committee
The only part of it I can recall at all was that
Professor Thompson, who was then director of what
were known as the Oceanographic Laboratories at
the University of Washington, his chief emphasis
that he just wanted to return to the pre-war
status, which I thought was singularly
unimaginative, as I remember. But yes, I think
that... It was pretty much dominated by Woods Hole
scripts, and then Lamont came on the scene, I
guess, about that time. And then there was this
flurry of establishment of essentially new
laboratories,
Chesapeake Bay Institute, Texas A&M in
particular come to mind here, and there were
several others, as I recall. What sort of fellow
was Islin? What was he like? Well, I think I,
although I was never sort of spent very much time at
Woods Hole and so on, apparently I knew more about
him than a lot of his people that more or less lived
with him, in that he was very much sort of a lone wolf
in a way, although he was quite outgoing in
meetings and conferences and so on. His private
life was something which was very much his own, and
he lived on Martha's Vineyard, and later on near
Boston, I think it was in Newton. I'm one of the few
people who's ever been a house guest at the
Estlunds as far as I know, and I don't know quite
why.
He was a real sort of a puzzle to me, in a way, because
he was
very imaginative in many ways, and very
farsighted in looking ahead and so on. In fact, I
was just thinking the other day that some of the
things he said to me, at the time I thought were
silly, and which I now look back on and see that he
was just about 10 or 20 years ahead of anybody else
and things. However, I always felt that he was in a
sense anti-intellectual, which sounds kind of
snobbish here, but his own background was only, I
think, up to level of a bachelor's degree. And his
degree, I think, was actually in anthropology. In
other words, he didn't have a very strong sort of
scientific background on which to build. And he
tended to look for similar types of people, in many
cases, who were interested but I would consider,
in a sense, not scientifically qualified. Now, he
made me a liar in a number of cases here, in that some
of these people that he had joined the Woodso
organization have turned out to be very
outstanding. But I would venture that this, out of
general average, was not too good. And one of the
great deficiencies I felt at Woods Hole was that
they never sincerely sought, I'm talking of the
era when Islin was there, but it tended to carry on
after he'd retired, was that they never really
supported an educational program either at Woods
Hole or anywhere else. They were very, very much
sort of research-oriented here. And it was only
when... I think it was Admiral Smith in particular
later on saw certain advantages which could be
achieved in terms of money by becoming an
educational institution. They sort of switched
in that direction, but I don't think they've ever
really taken it very seriously. That's my sort of
point here.
So
I asked Columbus one day, how do you recruit your
people? And he said, oh, I don't worry about that. I
have enough nice young men come knocking on my
door. I never have to go looking for people.
And I think this was true in many cases. They were
nice young men, in the best sense of the word. What
about Ewing? Oh, Ewing is an entrepreneur,
obviously, and very aggressive, very different,
and entirely different from Islin, with a very
tremendously
hardworking and
broadly interested and
very much the entrepreneur, as I said, capable of
interesting people, raising money, getting
things going, and so on. I think with a good eye in
most cases for people that he hired to work with
him, the main
sort of reservation I have about Ewing, as I used to
identify him, he was a cream skimmer. He'd get an
idea, do enough work on it to sort of meet his
particular interest at the moment, sometimes
correctly, sometimes, I think, misinterpreting
things, and then he'd move on to something else and
leave it to other people to kind of come along and
clean up Sometimes the mess, I think, he left
behind him, in a sense. But I think we can, in a field
such as this, we can always and should consider
ourselves fortunate to have some people like
that. We don't want everybody to be Morris Ewing.
That same charge has been leveled against Revell.
Would you agree with that? Well, Revell has
switched around a great deal.
And
yet I think, again, it's hard to make offhand kind
of judgments and evaluations, but his interests
were clearly much broader than Ewing's. And I
think it's fair to say that Ravel had, in a sense, an
altruistic interest in many of these things,
although they redounded to his glory in a way. But I
think Ewing's concerns were always, as things
affected Ewing. And I can't imagine Ewing getting
involved in these programs in India and so on,
Pakistan, as Ravel did, or or Ewing
going to Harvard, as Ravel did, and entering an
entirely new set of fields here. And so there's
really some very major differences, I think,
between them. Now, it's almost as if in, let's say,
about 48 or 49, right before you decide to come to
Washington, it's almost as if the ONR says, look,
there's not enough oceanographers to suit the
needs, and what we've got to do is move out and not
only establish departments of oceanography, but
establish particular kinds of departments of
oceanography. We need, for example, chemical
oceanographers, and where should that be and what
should it be? We need people to work on the Gulf
Coast, and what should they do and what should they
be? Would you agree with that? Yes, I think my, I
haven't thought about, these things for so long,
and dates and events and so on are getting
confused. But there was this sort
of regionalism, yes, that we ought to spot places
in appropriate coastal regions. And there was
nothing in the Gulf of Mexico and so on. And then
this Chesapeake Bay development came up, which
was really, I think, possibly brought into being
as much as anything else by the fact that ONR was
willing to put some money into it, although it was,
as I recall, sort of a tripartite arrangement at
first of Maryland, Virginia, and ONR. And that was
thought of as a center for sort of looking at large
bays and estuaries, and so it was partly regional,
partly sort of subject matter.
I
don't really recall any
a strong impetus really towards sort of training
programs, although they obviously came along
with this in a way. ONR is always in the rather
difficult position that they were not supposed to
support education as such. And so it was often
done, but it was budgeted for in essentially other
terms here. They certainly wanted to help here,
and Dr.
Thompson was the director of what were then known
as the Oceanographic Laboratories, which had
existed since about 1930 when the Rockefeller
money was available, and the laboratories were
set up. And there was some teaching prior to the
war, some local sort of work at sea with a very small
vessel which was actually sold by the university
during the war. So there was no vessel left here.
When Dr. Thompson came back to the university,
after the war he'd been in he had a commission in the
chemical warfare branch of the army he tried to
pick up the pieces and sort of re-establish a
program here and found it very difficult because a
lot of the people had moved away or died or got other
interests there was no vessel here and so on so he
was really faced with a real problem, and the first
thing that essentially the ONR did here was
provide a little money to essentially get a small
vessel going again and to support a few people and,
you know, as I indicated a while ago, kind of get it
going a little bit as it had been ten years
previously and so when I came out here ONR support
was about a hundred thousand dollars a year and
that was essentially the only support available
and it was available on a it's really kind of block
funding and it was out of this we began to develop
the programs here so Yes, I think it was a
deliberate effort of ONR to try and proliferate.
But I think in many cases, if the availability
of funds for some of these newer institutions and
trying to get the University of Washington back in
business again was essentially as long as it
didn't interfere too much with the funding of
Scripps and Woods Hole, which may sound like sour
grapes, but I think that in a way this was a sort of
situation. Who made contact with you to come out
here? I don't know exactly what happened, but the
man on the faculty or the administration here
contacted me was the dean of the College of Arts and
Sciences, Dean Lloyd Woodburn. And
I don't know whether I'd been suggested by Tommy
Thompson or just have, but
they had realized, and I think this is sort of worth
noting, that they couldn't go back to the kind of
pre-war operations, that something had to be done
here that would change the thing. And in the spring
of 1951, the Board of Regents, which is our
governing body, decided, I'm sure it was on the
recommendation of Dean Woodburn, to create a
Department of Oceanography in the College of Arts
and Sciences. which then just changed the
emphasis away from sort of a research activity
towards an educational activity and made it
entirely appropriate to go into sort of
undergraduate as well as graduate education.
There were two sort of separate entities here at
the university which had been operated before the
war and had returned to this sort of the situation
after the war,
both of them operated under this general title of
the Oceanographic Laboratories, plural. And one
was a facility at the Friday Harbor on the San Juan
Islands, which is a field station type thing. And
the building that had been erected on the main
campus here, which with Rockville
here is hidden by the other edifice here now. These
two things were operated jointly under Professor
Thompson. And when I came out here, the assumption
was that I would operate both of them. But for a
variety of reasons, it seemed much better to me to
operate them separately. But I was not only, I was
called executive officer Department of
Oceanography and director of the Friday Harbor
Laboratories. And I had two jobs, in effect, for
some seven years, I think it was. And then someone
else took over as director at the Friday Harbor
Laboratories. But I had dual sort of jobs here.
mentioned earlier I got into sort of
administration of one kind during the war,
administration of kind of another kind in
Washington. I came out here and I got into still
another kind of administration. So in many
respects I haven't been a research scientist for a
long, long time here and it was more by accident
than I think by choice. When you came to the west to
visit the dean, what did he tell you? What about the
Department of Oceanography he wanted you to find?
Oh, I think that
I had
fairly strong ideas at that time about what I
thought I wanted to do. And part of it had come out of
some deliberations that had gone on, and I can't
really remember at the moment who prompted them,
whether it was ONR or some other agency. We had a
number of meetings on essentially education in
oceanography, and there was a paper was finally
published, and I think it was in Science, if I
remember correctly, by Redfield and I think
Revell and several others, sort of setting out
what they felt the curriculum in oceanography
ought to be. And this was part of what I sort of had in
mind when I came out here. In other words, I wasn't
operating entirely on my own hunches here. There
was some agreement in a sense as to what might be
done now that what was different here was the
opportunity to get into the undergraduate
program and this it took us about a year I think to
develop a sort of program of courses and so forth
that we thought we could start with and and
we had our first students i guess in in about 1952
now uh this is in effect now the first institution
of undergraduate oceanography in the country and
possibly in the world uh so what sort of students
did you look for
Well, I don't know whether we looked for a
particular kind of students, because students
kind of come to you in a case like this. What we felt,
and I think correctly, was that we were offering
them a sort of an interesting field, but more
particularly, an opportunity for students.
obviously science-oriented, and in a sense here,
basically science-oriented, a basic science
orientation. A
field where the student could be a kind of a
scientific generalist rather than a specialist
And I've always felt that way, and I feel it even
more so today, that I'm not saying it's the kind of
program that should be available for everybody
or it really shouldn't displace the kind of
specialist programs. But I think there should be
opportunities at all levels for students who have
an inclination towards being broad, being
generalists, interdisciplinary, and these
other terms that are used. There should be some
opportunities for that. And this is essentially
what we started out with this in mind. The other
sort of things we had in mind was to prepare people
really for jobs in agencies such as hydrographic
office and other government and state agencies
who needed people. The other institutions at that
time were all post graduate and really all they
were interested in were doctoral people so they
were training all the generals but they didn't
have any Indians to go along with them and I felt
that not very glamorous, but certainly a need that
I thought we could meet, and I think we did fairly
well. The original sort of concept was that all the
students would go through a similar sort of
curriculum, but this only lasted for a relatively
few years, and then we began increasing in
numbers, and the research programming
increased, and there were more faculty, and so
forth. And I found I was essentially fighting a
losing battle here, because all of the
options, as we used to call them in the department,
physical, chemical, biological, geological,
and somewhat more recently geophysical, all
wanted to have their own sort of program So this
idea of a kind of a basic common undergraduate
preparation gave way to, again, more specialized
optional programs in these sort of five fields.
And I got sort of out of sorts with this as the years
went by. a swing in the other direction now, and
they're beginning to feel that maybe there is some
merit to having people who set abroad training
again. But it's taken 20 years or so for the
pendulum to swing, and it hasn't moved very far in
that direction. When you started choosing
faculty, what sort of faculty did you look for?
Well, this is more or less, you know, kind of
parallel to the students, so there's no one to look
for. When
I came out here, Professor Thompson, who was a
chemist and chemical oceanographer, Cliff
Barnes, who was originally a chemist but more so a
physical oceanographer, Morris Rattray, who had
come in just finishing his PhD from Caltech, who
was a theoretical hydrodynamicist, and myself. I
think that was about it. We had really nobody in the
geological area, nobody in the biological area,
and so part of my job was to obviously try and find
some people in these two sort of fields, and it
turned out be just as hard as it had been during the
war and back in the Hydrographic Office to find
anybody to go into these areas.
The first geological oceanographer I was able to
add to the faculty was Howard Gould, who's now and
has been for a number of years with the Humble
Research Laboratories in Houston. And he spent
several years with us and then felt he wanted more
money and so on, so he went to Humble. And the next
geologist I recruited was Joe Krager, who was a
brand new PhD out of Texas A&M. He was one of the very
first of the PhDs. But these people had very little
sort of experience themselves. I mean, they were,
as the most recent PhDs, and they had to, in a sense,
learn a lot on the job here. Not as far as this sort of
research, I'm not saying that, but from a teaching
point of view. The biologists turned out to be
almost equally hard to find anybody who was not
strictly a sort of a biologist, but had some of the
interests of what I would identify as a biological
oceanographer, which meant some other
background.
This turned out to be just as hard to find anybody
there.
This has more or less persisted, I think, even up to
today. One of the things that strikes me all the
time is that you can clearly fine research people
these days. Often, however, with really very
narrow kind of preparation, but very few of them
with any kind of teaching experience. Now, maybe
one of our contributions here has been the fact
that an awful lot of graduate students have been
teaching assistants here, a kind of experience
they never got in any of the other places. and do go
out of here, not all of them, but a good many of them,
with some kind of feeling about what the teaching
job is. How are you doing?